README.md, before:

# deterministic-agent-lab

A pnpm + TypeScript monorepo for building deterministic agent tooling, including journal, proxy, trace, and replay packages plus runner and gate applications.

## Workspace layout

- `packages/journal` — shared intent log models and driver SDK helpers.
- `packages/proxy` — HTTP(S) allowlist proxy with record/replay hooks.
- `packages/trace` — trace bundle format definitions with readers/writers.
- `packages/replay` — deterministic replay utilities (includes `replay verify` CLI plus Node/Python helpers for virtual clocks).
- `metrics/` — reproducibility metrics harness and reporting CLI.
- `apps/runner` — CLI entrypoint to run an agent inside a controlled container.
- `apps/gate-api` — Fastify API surface for plan/approve/commit/revert flows.
- `apps/gate-ui` — Next.js interface for reviewing diffs and approvals.
- `policy/` — Rego sources, Wasm bundle, and unit tests for gate policy enforcement.
- `examples/agents/echo` — toy agent used for end-to-end tests.

## Getting started

1. Install dependencies (Node 20+ is required):

   ```bash
   corepack enable pnpm
   pnpm install
   ```

2. Run development mode across workspaces:

   ```bash
   pnpm dev
   ```

3. Build, lint, and test:

   ```bash
   pnpm build
   pnpm lint
   pnpm test
   ```

### Makefile shortcuts

- `make up` — alias for `pnpm dev`.
- `make test` — alias for `pnpm test`.
- `make e2e` — runs example echo agent tests.

## Tooling

- TypeScript strict configuration shared through `tsconfig.base.json`.
- ESLint with `@typescript-eslint` rules.
- Vitest for unit and integration tests.
- Turborepo orchestrates build/lint/test/dev pipelines with caching.
- Devcontainer preconfigures Ubuntu, Node 20, Docker-in-Docker, and pnpm.

See [`docs/reproducibility.md`](docs/reproducibility.md) for a deeper look at the deterministic
architecture and how replay guarantees are measured in CI.

### Deterministic runner

The `agent-run` CLI orchestrates fully deterministic executions inside Docker. It
spawns the proxy (record or replay), wires `HTTP(S)_PROXY` for the container,
seeds RNG/clock (`AGENT_SEED`, `AGENT_START_TIME`), snapshots filesystem diffs,
and emits a trace bundle (`.tgz`).

```
# Record
pnpm --filter @deterministic-agent-lab/runner build
node apps/runner/dist/agent-run.js record \
  --image node:20-alpine \
  --bundle /tmp/echo-record.tgz \
  --allow policy.yaml \
  --base base.tar \
  --seed 42 \
  node echo.js "  hello  "

# Replay (bundle hashes can be compared via @deterministic-agent-lab/trace)
node apps/runner/dist/agent-run.js replay \
  --bundle /tmp/echo-record.tgz \
  --output /tmp/echo-replay.tgz
```

Agent executions run in deterministic mode by default (disable with
`--deterministic false`). The runner pins the container to a single vCPU,
exports seeded clock/RNG environment variables, and captures virtual clock ticks
for replay verification.

Node agents can preload deterministic timers via:

```
node -r @deterministic-agent-lab/runtime-node/register app.js
```

Python agents can install the same shims with:

```
python -m dal_runtime app.py
```

Both runtimes replace `Date.now()`/`datetime.now()` and seeded randomness so
replays observe a stable event ordering, even when timers or intervals overlap.

## Continuous Integration

GitHub Actions workflow installs pnpm, restores pnpm/Turborepo caches, and runs `pnpm lint`, `pnpm build`, and `pnpm test` on every push and pull request.

Commit message:

Add overlay filesystem isolation and write fences

README.md, after:

# deterministic-agent-lab

A pnpm + TypeScript monorepo for building deterministic agent tooling, including journal, proxy, trace, and replay packages plus runner and gate applications.

## Workspace layout

- `packages/journal` — shared intent log models and driver SDK helpers.
- `packages/proxy` — HTTP(S) allowlist proxy with record/replay hooks.
- `packages/trace` — trace bundle format definitions with readers/writers.
- `packages/replay` — deterministic replay utilities (includes `replay verify` CLI plus Node/Python helpers for virtual clocks).
- `metrics/` — reproducibility metrics harness and reporting CLI.
- `apps/runner` — CLI entrypoint to run an agent inside a controlled container.
- `apps/gate-api` — Fastify API surface for plan/approve/commit/revert flows.
- `apps/gate-ui` — Next.js interface for reviewing diffs and approvals.
- `policy/` — Rego sources, Wasm bundle, and unit tests for gate policy enforcement.
- `examples/agents/echo` — toy agent used for end-to-end tests.

## Getting started

1. Install dependencies (Node 20+ is required):

   ```bash
   corepack enable pnpm
   pnpm install
   ```

2. Run development mode across workspaces:

   ```bash
   pnpm dev
   ```

3. Build, lint, and test:

   ```bash
   pnpm build
   pnpm lint
   pnpm test
   ```

### Makefile shortcuts

- `make up` — alias for `pnpm dev`.
- `make test` — alias for `pnpm test`.
- `make e2e` — runs example echo agent tests.

## Tooling

- TypeScript strict configuration shared through `tsconfig.base.json`.
- ESLint with `@typescript-eslint` rules.
- Vitest for unit and integration tests.
- Turborepo orchestrates build/lint/test/dev pipelines with caching.
- Devcontainer preconfigures Ubuntu, Node 20, Docker-in-Docker, and pnpm.

See [`docs/reproducibility.md`](docs/reproducibility.md) for a deeper look at the deterministic
architecture and how replay guarantees are measured in CI.

### Deterministic runner

The `agent-run` CLI orchestrates fully deterministic executions inside Docker. It
spawns the proxy (record or replay), wires `HTTP(S)_PROXY` for the container,
seeds RNG/clock (`AGENT_SEED`, `AGENT_START_TIME`), snapshots filesystem diffs,
and emits a trace bundle (`.tgz`).

```
# Record
pnpm --filter @deterministic-agent-lab/runner build
node apps/runner/dist/agent-run.js record \
  --image node:20-alpine \
  --bundle /tmp/echo-record.tgz \
  --allow policy.yaml \
  --base base.tar \
  --seed 42 \
  node echo.js "  hello  "

# Replay (bundle hashes can be compared via @deterministic-agent-lab/trace)
node apps/runner/dist/agent-run.js replay \
  --bundle /tmp/echo-record.tgz \
  --output /tmp/echo-replay.tgz
```

Agent executions run in deterministic mode by default (disable with
`--deterministic false`). The runner pins the container to a single vCPU,
exports seeded clock/RNG environment variables, and captures virtual clock ticks
for replay verification.

On Linux hosts the runner mounts workspaces through OverlayFS so every write
lands in an isolated upperdir that is archived with the trace. Container roots
run with `--read-only`, `--cap-drop=ALL`, and only `/workspace` is writable via
the bound overlay mount (tmpfs mounts cover `/tmp`, `/run`, and `/var/tmp`).
Attempts to touch paths such as `/etc` or `$HOME` return read-only errors. When
OverlayFS is unavailable (for example on macOS hosts) the runner falls back to
its previous copy-on-write workspace strategy and logs a warning.

Node agents can preload deterministic timers via:

```
node -r @deterministic-agent-lab/runtime-node/register app.js
```

Python agents can install the same shims with:

```
python -m dal_runtime app.py
```

Both runtimes replace `Date.now()`/`datetime.now()` and seeded randomness so
replays observe a stable event ordering, even when timers or intervals overlap.

## Continuous Integration

GitHub Actions workflow installs pnpm, restores pnpm/Turborepo caches, and runs `pnpm lint`, `pnpm build`, and `pnpm test` on every push and pull request.
